Okay, so you're working on DLX print, right? So basically you're just adding these three instructions, three new opcodes, and you're implementing the circuitry to support those opcodes, and you're also going back to using actual hardware rather than just simulation. that pretty much summarizes it so where's everybody at what are you struggling with currently well knowing when to stall but I guess you know however big we make the stack just stall it when the stack is full we keep it stalled as the stack is full um but then yeah like appropriately sizing the stack because i could just make it super huge but i also could just make it like the max uh size that like the highest number uh-huh which is like nine digits plus a minus sign potentially so it's like a 10 size stack uh-huh then a string could easily be much longer than that true but does the does a string need to use the stack no tracks or stacks are only for converting integers to strings right yeah so what would it be helpful if we kind of drew a picture like a block diagram of all the pieces. So we know that we've got our, what should we call it our, let's not put it there, DLX execute. In our DLX execute what are we going to add? Basically we're going to add the front end of a FIFO aren't we? and how do we put stuff in the FIFO? Well we have to apply data and then typically we also need like a write enable line. So this is all new stuff right? This is new things that are going to get added to the execute stage. So So what does our data look like? Where does this data come from? The instruction, and specifically, isn't this the contents of a register? Right, so from the decode stage, things coming. Is this source register A or B? This is probably source register A, because if you look at the, right, it's just a single source register for the instruction, right? So this bus is already sitting in the, is already in the execute stage. You just need to route it to the front of this FIFO, and then also give it a write enable. And how will we decide if we're going to strobe write enable? That'll be based on the opcode, right? If the opcode is one of those three, then we'll strobe the write enable. Okay, so that's good. What stage of my pipeline is the backside of this FIFO sitting in? It's not really part of the pipeline, is it? This is just a completely separate peripheral module. Okay, and it feels like we've got an FSM sitting here, a finite state machine that's going to pull information out of the FIFO with a read enable, right? And we have like this idea of a stack. Jackson, would you mind shutting the door so we can block out? That sounds suspiciously like people that probably should be here. I'm not naming any names, but hmm. So we can put information on the stack, we can pull information off the stack, right? And then this is going to go over to maybe to another FIFO, and then this FIFO is going to feed my UART transmit. This seems like the hardest way to do it to me. Okay, how would you make it easier? Do just from execute a stack into a finite state machine into e-more. Okay, so remember, what's the purpose of this stack? To reorder stuff. Remember, in addition to the finite state machine, we also have a divider sitting here, don't we? So, John's proposal is we just take the data here and stuff it right onto the stack. What's the purpose of the stack specifically? Isn't the stack how we keep track of the stuff after it comes out of the divider? Yeah. Yeah. So it would be like execute to a state machine that has a stack that then spits it out anymore. I guess I'm just missing the point. Right, so we've got a, first of all, this data right here in the execute stage, how many bits is this data? If we're sending it, remember our options are, it could either be a character, a signed decimal value, or an unsigned integer value, agree? If it's a character, then it's only, a character is 8 bits wide, but if it's a decimal, if it's an integer, then it's the full 32 bits wide, right? So we definitely know that this needs to be, this is 32-bit data, right? Whoa, what did I do? This is 32-bit data here, and in fact, maybe it's more than 32 bits. Why? Because what else should we put in the FIFO besides the actual register contents? Not yet. Remember, the registered contents itself is the whole number, regardless of whether it's signed or unsigned. It seems to me like it would be useful to also send in what instruction this data is associated with. meaning here's 32 bits of data and oh by the way this is a PDU instruction or here's 32 bits of data and this is a PCH instruction. Why is that important? Because doesn't the state machine need to know which kind of instruction it was to know how to operate on that data? All right so 32 bits plus plus the op code maybe so maybe the FIFO is instead of 32 bits wide maybe it's like 38 bits wide or I could like encode the op code in like two bits couldn't I since I've only got three options for the op code I could say a zero zero means PD is zero one means PDU and one zero means PCH or you get the idea but I need that piece of information so that when the state machine pulls things out of the FIFO it knows what to do with it. If it pulls a PCH, right, pulls data plus PCH out of the FIFO, what should it do? If it's already a character, do I need to use the divider or the stack? No. Don't I just send that information straight on to the FIFO? And oh, by the way, what's the width of this data bus going into the FIFO? This FIFO is supposed to hold characters, so it would be 8 bits wide. So if the finite state machine sees that I received a PCH, I received a character, then I should just, what, just send the lower 8 bits of the 32 bits straight into the FIFO? I like that. So that's what, you think of the state machine as basically having like three different loops, three different branches that it could take. So that would be the simplest branch, right? I saw PCH, so just immediately send those eight bits on to the next FIFO. Okay. John, are you starting to see yet why we need this FIFO? I still think you could do it without either. Okay, so let's say that we've got a PDU, a print decimal unsigned. State machine says, oh, I see a print decimal unsigned. What should I do with it? Well, I know that I need to use my divider. How many times do I need to use the divider? Maximum. Do we need to go review what the divider was for? Remember, the dividers was for, if you think about the number represented as a base 10 number, the purpose of the divider is to pull individual digits off. So I divide by 10 and I keep the remainder. Wasn't that the approach? So don't I need to do that up to nine times? So I need to do nine divisions here. How many clock cycles is that going to take to do nine divisions? Many. So what happens if I don't have a FIFO sitting here to buffer up like potentially additional print instructions that want to come in while this is off for potentially hundreds of clock cycles taking care of all the divisions. My choices are buffer up things in a FIFO or immediately stall while I let this repeated division run its course. And I think the FIFO is the better way to go by far. Have I convinced you yet? I think so. But the 8-depth FIFO could be deleted and just print off the stack. Okay, I mean, let's think about this one. Where's the bottleneck here? I've got all these pieces. Which piece of this is going to run the slowest? Probably this, right? This is typically orders of magnitude slower than everything else. So if things are going to pile up, where are they going to pile up? Aren't they going to pile up in this FIFO? Because the UART can't keep up? So if this FIFO doesn't exist, where am I going to let stuff pile up? Remember, the whole purpose of the stack is it's only supposed to keep track of one integer's worth of decimal digits, decimal characters. So maybe you come up with a way where you make this FIFO stall things. but to me it makes more sense to have another FIFO sitting here and FIFOs are cheap right that's about as simple of an interface as you can get you just present data and strobe the write enable to stick stuff in watch the empty flag and when it goes not empty use the read enable to pull stuff out and that's really all there is to it so yes John there probably is a way that we could get away with not using that FIFO. Okay, so again if it's a PCH command we just immediately pull it out of one FIFO and stuff it into the other. If it's a PDU, what is PDU? Print decimal unsigned, that means I don't have to worry about the negative number. Print decimal unsigned, I just do the repeated division and stuff the remainder digits into the stack and then what? Read them back out of the stack one by one and as I read them out of the stack I immediately push it into this FIFO. Agree? If it's a PD, a print decimal signed, then what? Yeah, take the 2's complement to basically take the absolute value, right? And then what? Then set a flag somewhere saying, hey, I'm working on a negative number. And then do the same thing, right? Just make sure that the first character you put out is the negative sign character before you pull out the absolute value characters and send them out. Okay, anybody, everybody okay with this picture? Does this make sense? Anybody agree or disagree with what we've got going on here? So let's talk for just a minute about clock domains. We want our DLX processor to run as fast as possible, right? So let's just say hypothetically that this is running, let's say my execute stage is running on the 50 megahertz clock domain. Ideally, it will run faster than that, but for now, let's say 50 megahertz is what we're at. Is it true that any time I have a FIFO, I could also be crossing a clock domain, potentially? Isn't that one of the purposes of FIFOs, is to cleanly cross clock domains? So I've got a FIFO here, do I want this state machine running at 50 megahertz also? Maybe. How about this one over here, right? This is months ago when you designed your UART transmitter, but notice there's a FIFO there. So what clock frequency did you design your UART to run at? Remember, there were two things. You designed it for a specific baud rate and you designed it for a specific frequency and then there was a like a divider not not literally a divider but a right eat yeah you understand what I'm saying so what's our goal here do we want this to go out as fast as possible but the faster this talks the less likely we're gonna get backed up and have to stall agree so don't we want this to go at the fastest baud rate we can so maybe maybe we crank it up to like 115.2 kilobaud that's moving pretty fast but how does that compare to 50 megahertz still orders a magnitude slower okay anyway so we've got 50 megahertz going here we want this to go at 11.2 kilobaud 115.2 kilobaud, what does that mean about the clock frequency of this module? Remember for the UARTs, the whole discussion about oversampling and all that stuff. Do we need to oversample on the transmit side, or was that only for receive? It was only for receive, so it seems to me like we're saying this is also going to run at 115.2 kilohertz, potentially. That would make sense, okay, so we got a 50 megahertz domain here, we got a 115.2 kilohertz domain here. What do we do here in the middle? Should we create a third clock domain or should we pick either the the 50 or the 115.2? Probably makes sense to not complicate things by adding yet another clock domain. So which would make more sense for the state machine and the divider and the stack to run on the 50 megahertz, on the fast clock, or the slow clock? The fast clock. So I can get through the division faster. So maybe this also runs at 50 megahertz. could I run this at 50 megahertz I could but I'd have to adjust my transmit state machine to count multiple top clock ticks to represent each each bit width going out of the you are basically you could you're not gonna go there's no there's no 50 megabawd rate. What do you know the highest? So typically I mean going above I mean 115.2k is is screaming for UART. If you go faster than that you start running into AC signal issues usually like capacitance and inductance and the lines. You can technically go up to like 430 kilohertz 430 kilohertz but I that that's iffy but you definitely you definitely want to max that out get it to go as fast as you can reliably get it to go for sure okay yeah so if you if you're wondering whether you're going too fast, the simplest way to look at it is to actually put it on a oscilloscope, right, because you'll actually see the ones and zeros. And if it stops looking like a square wave, like with 90 degree angles, and it starts looking more like a smear, that's an indication that you're trying to go too fast. Okay, 115.2k should work okay. Okay, so let's assume I'm going 50 megahertz, 50 megahertz, 115.2 kilohertz. Now back to the question that was asked, this is a long answer to a short question. How do I know when my processor needs to stall, okay, when this FIFO gets full? Is there a chance that it could be this FIFO that gets full first? I mean, let's imagine what would be the worst-case scenario for this FIFO getting full. Wouldn't it be like 20 PDUs in a row? Because each one of those PDUs would need to use the divider and the stack. So there is a scenario where this would fill up before this. So is it true that I need to stall when either this FIFO gets full or this FIFO gets full? Kind of feels like we need to watch both of them, don't we? So yeah, stall if this FIFO is full or if this FIFO is full. So my guess is you already have some sort of stall logic where you're watching if these signals look a certain way, then stall. Couldn't you just add two more signals to your list of things to look at to stall? Add these two FIFO full flags, and if either one of them is full, then also stall. What would be the simplest way to do it? Is there a chance that the stack fills up first before the FIFOs? So again, what are we holding in this stack? The whole purpose of the stack is to store the base 10 digits in reverse order. Am I ever going to have more than one integer's worth of characters in the stack at a time? No. So there's no way that this is going to overflow. So we don't need to worry about that one. Right? Because what's going to happen is this one's going to overflow first. So I'll read an integer value out of here, use the stack to reorder the digits, and while I'm going through all that mess with the divider and the stack, this FIFO is potentially filling up from additional PD or PDU instructions or PCH instructions for that matter. Okay, good. It's been a while since we've actually used hardware. I've been talking to a few groups that have forgotten some of the details associated with putting things on hardware. So, I mean, maybe what we should do is this. Let's make a list of the important things. So, if I'm trying to put things on hardware, what are the things I need to be careful about? Yes. So, every project, every Quartus project needs a .sdc and a .qsf file. Why? What's in the .sdc file? The timing constraints. And what's in the .qsf file? The pin assignments. Why is it important to have PIN assignments? What happens if you don't have PIN assignments? The compiler chooses whatever PINs it feels like. There is a, I won't say who, but a group earlier today probably fried their board because they forgot the QSF file. What's the easiest way to make sure that I have the SDC in the QSF file? Use system builder, because it builds it, it creates it all for you. Okay, what else? When I'm compiling in Quartus, I have to pay attention to warnings. Remember it will still compile even if you have warnings. What are typical warnings that we need to be aware of? Any warning about inferring latches, you absolutely have to fix, or it's not going to behave properly in hardware. So that's things like inferred latches. What else is common? Signals missing in sensitivity list. I think those are the two main ones that I see. Three. Timing issues. How do you know if Cordis met timing? Well, it doesn't give you any warnings that it failed timing. What happens, what do you do if it fails timing? Put it on your hardware anyway and see what happens? How do you, if you get a timing violation and Cordis will tell you, hey you didn't meet timing what should you do about it what's the simplest thing to do about it slow down your clock is a PLL or something or a different clock source to slow down your clock okay if any of these three any of these three things are missing it's not gonna give you happy results in hardware Amaya? No requirement for this lab. Eventually you're going to want to run as fast as possible but for this lab no requirement. Oh yeah remember you're you're adding this new dot const section to your assembler. Everybody got that going okay? You're still working on that part too? Any questions about the about the dot const? Yeah, in our assembler, even in the data section, for negative signs numbers, will it just have the negative sign in the dlx file? All right, so let's let's go down here PCH. So like for example here on our here's our dot data segment right n 1 10 could that be a could that be a negative 10? yeah and it's fine because remember these aren't these are just numbers so as you as you read has your as your assembler reads the text file it should be able to handle negative numbers as well as and I imagine it does just by default if you're intending to read an integer right and if it was a 10 or a negative 10 either way it should it should just work fine okay is that going to change what it looks like in the output of the assembler yes so the output of your assembler is probably in hex in hex a 10 and a negative 10 are not the same thing right a negative 10 is going to look like a zero X F F F F whatever okay the dot const so basically you're going to treat this like an array of an array of characters but each character is going to be 32 bits wide just to make it less painful to implement right we let a character live at each address even though we're word addressable so you can thank me later for making that easier than it could have been. Okay, what other questions do you have? Does everybody feel comfortable using SignalTap? This is probably the lab where SignalTap is going to be a useful tool. So if you've skated by for like a semester and a half without using it, this is the time to actually figure it out. Because we're dealing with the UART and the external system, you can't really simulate that so easily in Cuesta or in ModelSim. So SignalTap is going to prove very useful, I think. Yeah? Could you show us some of the basics of SignalTap? I've used it before, but I think some of the stuff I kind of forgot. Okay. Yep. Yep. So, right, inside of Quartus, I start signal tap. Can you see that? Okay. This TV is dead. I don't know what happened to this one. It's still on spring break. Pushing the control on the monitor does nothing. So, if you remember, when we're using signal tap, there's three things we have to configure. We pick a sampling clock, well I guess there's more than three, but there's three main things. We pick our sampling clock and it makes sense that you pick the same clock as the clock your logic that you want to look at is running on. So if my design is running on clock 150, I should choose that as my sampling clock also. So I get a sample for every clock tick. I specify how depth, right, how much data, how deep I want my sampling to be, 4K. Notice when it's 4K deep, it's using 19 memory blocks. If I switch it like to AK, oh, see how it doubled the number of memory blocks it wants to use. So up to you how deep you want to make it. Whoa, that's fine. continuous, so I set up my measurement clock, my sample depth, then I need to pick some actual signals to watch, and the font's all messed up here, but basically what I do is right click, and then do something like add nodes, right, this kind of a menu looks familiar hopefully. Go to SignalTap. Yep, SignalTap. Presynthesis. Yes, because presynthesis is the actual names from your VHDL. If you pick something else it's going to rename your signals weird stuff and it's not going to be obvious what what they correspond to. Okay, so then I can just click list right and Here's the list, and I can just move them over into this window, the ones that I actually want to watch. Remember, the more that I choose here, the more memory that it's going to consume. Then, the other thing that I have to do is actually set up a trigger, right? Some signal or a combination of signals. Let's say that I want to, I'll right-click there. Let's say I want a trigger on the rising edge of going into my add state of my finite state machine, as an example. And that's about all there is to it. Then I compile. I start compilation here. Once it's done, I can program it right here, or I could use the other regular Quartus programmer, either way. and then these buttons become available and I can play and stop. If I hit play, it will pause when it hits the break point and then I can hit play again and it will go some more until it hits the break point. This is all I can show you right now because I don't actually have hardware connected. So, yep. All right. Other questions from anybody? The LX file will make her with these strings. Will the idea kind of be like a loop on load word and the pvpch? L-W-P-C-H, L-W-P-C-H, right, as you work your way through the entire string. And the, okay, right, right, because load where it has a base and offset. Yes, I understand. Yep. You got it. And it does, I mean, it is kind of cool to actually see it work in hardware. The one group that passed off already, he was pretty excited that he had it working. you could hear the usually when you all film like pass-off videos they're pretty not boring but you're not but he was impressively excited about what about his pass-off video this time so i was pleasantly pleased i was pleased about that okay So what, I mean, what stage are you all on? Everybody made the modifications to your assembler? Okay. How about who's successfully generated the divider? Not yet? Okay. Remember, that's the, use the IP. All right, the IP catalog, basic functions, arithmetic, LPM divide, and remember you can choose how many clock cycles it takes to perform a division. And the trade-off is the more clock cycles it takes, the faster the clock can run. So that might be something to play around with to figure out how to optimize it. So does it make sense that your state machine, while the divider is running, what's your state machine doing? So let's say we got a PDU, we pull the value out of the FIFO, we see that it's a PDU, so So we send the 32-bit value to the divider, and then what? Wait some number of clock cycles for the divider to finish, right? The state machine is just going to wait until the divider finishes, and then once it's done, it'll grab the quotient or the remainder from the divider? The remainder from the divider and put it in the stack. and then repeat the process for the next digit. And how many has it going to know when it's done? It doesn't need to do eight or nine divisions for each integer, does it? That's the worst case. So how is it going to know? Does the IP have like a done signal? It does have a done. I mean, it may have a done. I don't remember. But you know how many clock cycles it's going to take to finish. My question is, how many divides do you need to do before you're done with the whole number, okay? Until what's zero? The quotient, right? Until the quotient is zero. When you see a quotient of zero, then you know that you're done. There's no more divisions to do. I agree, that's how you know. What would happen if you kept going, kept doing divides and putting things in the stack even after the quotient was zero. You just keep putting more zeros into the stack and then then what? When you go to drain the stack and print them out you're going to get leading zeros on your number which probably isn't what you want. I mean I guess technically it would still be the right number with leading zeros but okay what other questions do people have everybody still kind of have a spring break hangover that was that what's going on anything else okay on remember these are this labs do Wednesday evening and on Wednesday we will give you your the next lab where we get to provide input to our processor. So that'll just be even more fun than output. All right, we'll call it a day.