Today our plan is to talk about scanning in integers. On Friday, we're going to have two presentations, one on OpenCL and one on the Cray CS500. I'm looking, are these people even here today? Hmm. Well, hopefully they remember to come on Friday. Yeah. So scanning integers. Let's jump into it. This is the lab for the week. We've already decided that when we, right, a processor is not very useful if it doesn't, if we can't do input and output. So for the lab that's due today, we're working on output. Everybody that got it working, do you agree that it's kind of a sense of accomplishment to see your processor actually work and actually print things on the screen? Pretty cool, right? Well, we already have output interface that lets us print character constants and integers over the UART. The obvious next step is to have it consume input also. So where would we get input from? Also putty over the UART? Let's talk about enabling the DLX processor to consume integer inputs from the UART. So we're not going to make you consume characters or character strings. We're just going to stick to integers, at least for now. So let's talk about two new opcodes to add to our DLX instruction set. GD, for get decimal integer, and GDU, for get decimal integer unsigned. So we won't have to handle characters on them? Nope, no characters. I assume these aren't just like single digit integers, right? It could be 32-bit integers, because notice, we're going to put them in a, right, we're going to provide a single destination register, So yes, it should be able to handle 32-bit signed or unsigned integers. So in decimal, obviously, that means more than one digit. It needs to be able to handle more than one digit. And just for the sake of continuity, we'll let these opcodes be hex 34 and hex 35. I think, didn't we leave off with hex 33 for the last lab? so let's talk through this just like we did for the output for the printing characters for the getting characters where do we need to tap into our pipeline so that the architecture can support this new functionality Right back. Right back? Okay. Let's do this. Turn to your partner and talk about this for 30 seconds. What needs to get modified? Turn to your neighbor. What needs to be modified so that our architecture supports this new functionality? I don't know, I think it should start. I don't know, I think it should start. Oh, okay. I'm trying to keep fighting against that. All right. what does everybody think? These instructions involve writing to a register, so what does that kind of imply? That's the write back stage, it's where we already have that functionality built in to write to a register, so it has something to do with write back. Is that all it's going to touch is right back. Execute. So yeah. The possibility of you need to stall after you get it, so can you get the character and then immediately write it to use the value. Alright, so if we're going to consume input from the user, does that imply stalling? Is the user going to type in the input on the exact clock cycle that the processor needs it? No. So it's going to take many, many, many clock cycles to type in the whole integer and hit enter and have it propagate across. So it feels like maybe it partially lives in write-back and maybe the other part of it lives in execute. In execute, Don't we already kind of have a parallel path for output over the UART? Now we're saying maybe we have yet another parallel path for input from the UART, potentially. Seems like it makes sense. Anybody have other ideas about how this should look? Or did everybody pretty much come to the same conclusion? Okay. We need to store a value in a destination register. Maybe this kind of looks like loadWord. Isn't loadWord one of the ways to use the writeback stage? Maybe the instructions kind of look like loadWord, but instead of loading a value from a memory location, we're going to get a value from the UART and load it into a register. Okay, talked about that. We need to somehow pause the pipeline until the data shows up. How long should it pause for? I mean, could it pause for days or weeks? Yeah, if the user never types anything, won't it just sit there waiting, waiting, waiting? So the tricky thing about this stall, or this pause, is we don't know how long it's going to pause for. Well, it's until the user hits enter, right? So somehow we're going to have to know, I mean, what would that look like? Yeah, a flag, Vanessa, maybe it would be like a FIFO empty flag that goes not empty. When the FIFO is not empty, then we can know we're done stalling. Yep, that's an idea. Okay, so let's talk about this. When information gets typed on the keyboard and it goes across PuTTY, it's not an integer, it's a character string. So we have to convert string to integer, don't we? Is there a C function that converts strings to integers? I know that you all used to know the answer to this, if you don't remember it. There's STOL, STOL. Yep, there's also A2Y. A2Y, convert a string to an integer. So it seems like our hardware needs to do something similar. So let's look at this algorithm and see if we can figure out what's going on. First of all, when we were going the other way for the last lab, we had to do division. Remember division and keeping the remainder? didn't that peel the least significant digit off? So if we did division to convert from integers to strings, to go from strings to integers, we should do multiplication. And look, there's a multiplication sitting right there. So, we've got an array of characters. We'll call it C for now. Obviously, 100 is overly optimistic. We don't need 100 digits for a 32-bit integer. But anyway, we'll prompt them to enter an integer. We'll do scanf. Everybody remembers how scanf works with the percent s. That'll get a string and store it in this array named c. But the interesting part is this while loop. What are we doing? We're going to walk our way through the array, basically. while c sub i is not equal to the null, what, the null character? Remember c and c++ strings are null terminated, so we see the null character, that tells us when we made it to the end of the string. n started as 0, n is equal to n times 10, n equals n plus, what's this right here doing? The i-th character in the string C, and I'm going to subtract 48 from it. That's going to convert the ASCII digit to an actual decimal number. And add that, right? Accumulate that with our n, and then do i++, right? I++ will move us on to the next character. Everybody understand what the n equals n times 10 is doing? What are we doing? We don't know, right? When the characters start coming in over you, do we know how many characters are going to show up? No. So all we can assume is that it's just going to be one character. If just one character, one digit comes across, that's by definition the ones place digit, right? If another digit comes along, that digit that we already processed, we just realized, oh, that's not the ones digit. That's actually the tens digit, so I need to multiply it by ten and then add it to the new ones digit. But what if another digit comes? Well, I have to slide the tens over to the hundreds and the ones, see, multiplying by ten every time to slide the number over as new digits come in. everybody understand how this how this algorithm works in in software so then the question is can you duplicate this can you mimic this in hardware what what building what hardware building blocks are we going to need here well we know that it needs a multiplication. Is that a problem? We can instantiate a hardware multiplier can't we? We already did a divider so a multiplier should be a piece of cake. Let's go look here. This is the same one we were looking at for the for the divide, right? There's also an LPM molt. I realize that's hard to see but notice it takes clock, data A, data B, a reset, a clock enable, and a result. So either data A or data B should be permanently tied to the constant 10 right and then the other one will just be our input from the from the UART after we subtract after we subtract 48 okay what it makes sense that this probably you could configure this to take multiple clock cycles to complete you can you can you can pick how many how many clock cycles how many pipeline stages there are here. I'm going to give you one warning though, one warning. If you pay attention to this, this is going to save you a whole bunch of time. If you go, if you run the IP, what is it called, the IP catalog mega wizard, it's going to want to make result, right, you can specify how many bits wide data A and data B are. Data A is probably 32 bits wide, data B, whatever, right, because it's hard coded to the constant 10. If I do a 32 bit times a 32 bit, what should be, how should I bound my answer if I want to prevent overflow? A 32 bit times a 32 bit is guaranteed to fit in a 64 bit product. Is that what we want to have happen here? No, because our register is only 32 bits wide, right? So you have to think about that carefully. You can size the result to be whatever, however many bits wide you want, but it will truncate, If you do 32 times 32 and say the output is also 32, well, it should have been 64, but if it's only 32, it's going to truncate. And guess which end it truncates on? It truncates on the least significant end. What? Why would it do that? It's rounding, it's rounding instead of overflowing. Is rounding a better choice than overflowing? Okay, you've been warned, account for that here. You're going to have to think about how to account for that, because I don't think we want rounding or overflowing to happen. Is it possible that overflow will happen? Yes. If we have a poorly behaved user that types in a number that's too big to fit in 32 bits, overflow could happen. If we have a well-behaved user that actually provides an integer that fits in 32 bits, will we get an overflow problem? No. No, we won't. We can use the assumption that it's a good user using it? Yep, because it's probably going to be you that's using it. Okay, so it contains a multiplication. So I think we can get around that by using the multiplier. Couldn't we also just use the asterisk symbol directly in my .vhd file? Sure. I could, but what's the problem with that? It doesn't all work. it it's asynchronous right there's no we can't split it up into multiple clock cycles and what's the problem with that it's going to restrict my maximum clock frequency which I care about if I want this thing to run reasonably fast okay do we need one or more FIFOs here to make this thing work maybe it's should Should we draw a picture really quick? Let's see. Let's draw a picture. So slow. So we know, let's draw a block diagram of what we think this thing looks like. We've got a module here that we'll call UARTRX, okay? And basically, this block you already did way back in Lab 1, and its whole job is to convert a stream of bits into a single byte, right? Basically, a bus that's 8 bits wide. So let's say it's doing its thing. It's converting streams of bits into bytes. And then over here somewhere, we've got our DLX processor. How do we get from the UART to the processor? Does it feel like a good idea to have a FIFO here? In fact, yeah, never mind. We can put a FIFO here. And then after the FIFO, what? maybe a state machine. Now what's the purpose of this state machine? The purpose of this state machine is to implement this, right? So that's the state machine and then maybe with some sort of a multiplier associated with it. How is the state machine going to know if it has something, some job that it needs to do? It's going to watch the FIFO, right? What's it going to produce? So this FIFO, this is like eight bits wide and this is 8 bits wide. What comes out of the state machine? 32 bits wide? Where are we going to put that? Eventually it's going to get into a register. I mean the question is that do we maybe need another FIFO sitting right here first I mean what would it yeah okay so the FSM could watch the empty flag here and some other signal coming from the DLX telling us ready to ready to risk yeah we could we could do it that way I mean could could we optionally have another FIFO right here? We could. It's kind of up to you as to whether you want this FIFO. I think this FIFO here is kind of mandatory, but this one here is kind of up to you whether you want to do it with or without this FIFO. So either we go through the FIFO to the DLX or we just go straight to DLX. This kind of feels easier than output, doesn't it? Because we don't have to mess with the divider. We don't have to do the stack to reorder the digits. This is actually going to be easier, believe it or not. The trickiest part of this is making it stall until the user input actually shows up. So here's a question for you. Let's say that this FIFO, let's say that the user starts typing digits on the keyboard before the program gets to the GD or the GDU instruction. Is that a problem? Okay. Is it okay if the keys typed in early, if those values just got sort of weighted in this FIFO or this FIFO until it was time to consume them? Would that be expected behavior? The answer is yes. That's how C and C++ work also, the whole idea of the input stream. If there's something already waiting in the input stream, it consumes it immediately. You don't have to wait for key presses on the keyboard if there's already stuff waiting that was pressed previously. So that's good news. Is there a chance that I could have more than one integer sitting in this FIFO simultaneously? Let's say that I get in an integer that's like five digits long and then another one that's four digits long. And what if the five-digit number and the four, what if there's nine values sitting in that FIFO? How is the state machine going to know when the first integer ends and the second one begins? Enter key. Okay, enter key, right? In PuTTY, how do you initiate the actual, when you're transmitting out of the computer to the FPGA, when does that communication actually start? It's when you hit enter. You type all the characters, the characters just sit there until you hit enter, then all the characters go across at once. And guess what? That enter key also gets transmitted. What does the enter key look like? It's actually a new line, right, a new line character. So our state machine should probably be smart. How does it know when it's done with the current integer it's working on? It knows when it sees the new line character. Okay, so the question was, I mean, I think you should make it robust enough that it should, right? We're only going to do integers, gd and gdu. So I just think you should make it smart enough to just ignore any other characters that aren't digits, that aren't numbers. Okay. All right. Where's the bottleneck here timing-wise? If this gets backed up, where is it going to get backed up? this is slow isn't it our baud rate out here this is slow even if we make it turn it clear up to like 115.2 kilobaud it's still way way way way slow so the only way this is going to get backed up is if the user types in a whole bunch of stuff and this FIFL gets filled up and the The program hasn't made it to a GD or a GDU instruction yet, I think. Can you do weird stuff like paste into the URL or something? Yeah, you can. So that might help. Okay, so you could. Could you do like a copy and paste into Putty and then hit enter with like thousands of characters all at once? Yeah, you could. How should your processor handle that? Okay, should we make this, should we size this, should this be a pretty hefty size FIFO? Try to make it deep enough that it can handle any reasonable amount of input that all comes in in a burst. What's a reasonable amount? Just fill up whatever memory I've left. A hundred characters, a thousand characters. I struggle to envision like more than a thousand but again C and C++ like other programming languages and architectures have the same problem right the input buffer is a fixed size it is possible to overflow the input buffer so make sure you consider your bottleneck situation is there ever going to be a way where the processor, where the DLX processor itself can't keep up? No. Nope. Because it only asks for an integer when it sees a GD or a GDU instruction. Okay. All right. There's that. There's that. There's a multiplication. Seems like we need at least one FIFO and maybe two. My rule of thumb is when in doubt, add a FIFO. It's never a horrible idea. One FIFO to handle the input data from the URX line. A finite state machine to convert the string to an integer. And like we said, maybe a FIFO to buffer the data waiting to be consumed by the DLX processor. okay talked about this is it actually a string that's coming across in the strict c c++ sense of the word is it a string no there is no null character it's just a sequence of individual characters so don't don't start looking for a null character or you're going to be looking for a long time. And again, just to re-emphasize, how long should the pipeline stall while waiting for the integer? As long as it takes before something comes in on the UART. As long as needed, possibly billions or billions or trillions of clock cycles. So what's your, what's the DLX processor going to be doing for all those billions of clock ticks? Basically inserted no ops, right? Okay, everybody understand. Yes, John. So I'm just a little confused with Putty, I guess. I thought that whenever you press any key, it will transmit it and also receive, not like store it and then wait for an enter. Like I remember our lap one, we would just type letters and they'd come back. Okay. All right. So there's actually different modes that Putty can operate in. That's kind of what I think. Okay. But does it matter? Let's say that I got putty configured in a way that every time I hit a key, that character immediately gets transmitted. Eventually, I'm still going to hit the enter key, right? And then all those characters are going to pile up in my FIFO. So either they all came at once or they came one by one over, but either way, it still should work the same because the state machine knows that it's not done until it sees the new line character. So it might have to, I mean, what should it do? If the way John described it is how your terminal is actually working, your state machine might have to pause, right? it might get a character, then it might have to pause and wait for the next character to show up and then pause some amount of time until the next character shows up. Yep. Especially, like, that FSM is probably running at the processor speed or the bond speed, so it's going to have to wait a while, even if your Rx is just shoving in as fast as it can. Yep. So, I mean, the takeaway here is that as soon as the state machine sees the FIFO go not empty, that does not guarantee you that the entire integer is waiting in the FIFO. All that it guarantees you is that at least one digit of the integer is waiting in the FIFO. So could we have the finite state machine waiting until the decimal signal comes from the DLX pipeline, or would you recommend it? And it all just starts multiplying it. So how, okay. Okay, so notice, if we wait until, so the question was, what if the FSM held off until the DLX processor said, oh, I'm ready to get an integer, I made it to the GD or the GDU instruction. If I waited until then to start pulling things out of this FIFO and doing the multiplication, now I've kind of slowed things down, right? I think it makes more sense that as soon as something shows up here, convert it from characters to integers as fast as possible, which would imply that you do have this FIFO sitting here, so that when a GD or a GDU instruction comes along, hopefully what you're looking for is already sitting right here. So as far as the clock domains, is all of this in the same clock? Like, is the score of read clock completely contained in the U? All right, so here in the UART, what's our baud rate here? So for receive, remember we had to oversample. What did you, didn't you have a choice? You could oversample by 8 or by 16, one or the other. Okay, so let's say that this is running at baud rate of, I'm going to be optimistic and say we've cranked it clear up to 115.2 kilobots. What's 150.2 kilobaud times 8, yeah? Pull up a calculator here. So 15.2 times 8. Yep, so let's say that this, right, let's say that RX is running at 921.6 kilohertz. Everybody understand where that came from? We know that DLX is running at something, hopefully, a lot faster than that. So should we take a stab and say it's running at 50 MHz? Okay, so quick, I mean, rule of thumb, I definitely need to cross a clock domain boundary at least once here. And where is the proper place to cross clock domain boundaries? FIFOs. Either this FIFO or this FIFO. Would it make sense to put the boundary here and let the state machine run on the 50 megahertz clock? Is there any downside to doing that? The multiplier has to be faster, which might mean more pipeline stages in the multiplier. but it also means that I'm going to crank through, I can drain this FIFO faster and get things into this optional FIFO or output to the DLX faster. So it seems to me that the clock domain boundary is right there. Is there any problem with having the state machine run on the 921.6 kHz clock? and make the boundary, have this FIFO here, and make the boundary here instead? It's slower. It's slower. You might get away with using the asterisk operator in the code. Okay. All right. Yeah, maybe you could get away with an asynchronous multiplier rather than having to use the mega wizard. If this, if the state machine lives in the 921.6 kilohertz domain, will it be able to keep up with everything coming in here? If this is right, but we get eight clock ticks here for every bit that comes in here, so I think it'll be okay. Okay, the pessimist in me that wants to live on the safe side says, crank, make this go as fast as possible. Stay away from that, stay away from this not being able to keep up by having this run on the 50 megahertz. Okay, how about a, I mean, what if I made another boundary here, and then I just picked some arbitrary third clock frequency here in the middle? Right? Everybody agree that creating additional clock domains for no reason is a recipe for insanity? Don't do that. Use all PLL channels. All 16. So, yeah. Right? The boundary should either be there or there, but not in both places. Because could I actually, I mean, could I have no clock domain boundaries? Could everything run on the 50, could I run this on the 50 megahertz? I mean, it wouldn't be an oversample by 8 anymore. It would be an oversample by something else instead, right? I would suggest you not do that. Because later in the semester, aren't we going to see how fast we can crank this up? So what's going to happen if this clock frequency is also this clock frequency, but I keep tweaking it, I keep adjusting it over and over. Every time I adjust it, my oversampling is broken and I'll have to go repair it. So keep, if nothing else, at least keep these two clock domains separate to preserve your own mental health, if nothing else. Okay, all right, everybody understand the mission, understand what you need to get done for next week. Let's go look at the lab requirements. All right, you're going to add the two new instructions, plus modifications to the architecture to handle the GD and the GDU, implement the correct functionality in the pipeline to handle the new instructions. And for pass-off, it's just a 10-point pass-off this time rather than 20. For pass-off, you're just going to show me a fully functional DLX factorial program. Welcome to the DLX factorial program. The program will say, enter a number, and then it'll pause and wait for the user, in this case to type in a 6, and then it will apply 6 factorial is 720. It's going to work. We're going to have a fully functional processor here. And notice, please, when you're doing your pass-off video or whatever, make sure you run the program multiple times with different inputs, right? Because if you just do factorial of 6, then you could, not that anybody would, but it could be possible that you could just hard code it. Yeah? After this, it's just the final project, right? This is the last lab before the final project, yes. Yep? So are you expecting when we hit enter, does 6 factorial equal 720, but then it doesn't say welcome to the DLX factorial program? Correct. Like if I just did 6, enter 7, enter? If you want, you could put it in a loop that keeps prompting over and over again. That would be fine. I mean, if we do it this way, you'd have to hit reset, right? If you hit reset, it would start back over again. So either way is fine. Either way is fine. I mean, this is kind of like the moment you've been waiting for all semester, the moment when your processor is actually fully functional. I don't see too much excitement. Everybody looks at it. Well, because it also might not be functional. I know some of us found out that things we previously thought were functional weren't. Oh, okay. All right. Anybody have questions about what I want you to do for next Wednesday? This is due a week from now, Wednesday at 11.59 p.m. both pass-off and report, like usual. And like I said, this should be, lab 9 here should be easier than lab 8. It should be. Should be. At least for me, lab 9 was easier than lab 8. I remember watching a lecture video on the report and I thought you said this last lab was also going to be easier than the pipeline labs. So the, I mean, lab, this is lab 9, Lab 8 should have been easier than the hazards lab. Yeah, maybe you did the hazards lab wrong, and then that's breaking, make breaking lab 8 so you can't do it anymore. Okay, so anybody have any last questions for today? Remember, quiz three by the end of the day today. Lab eight reports and pass-offs. I'm expecting to see about, I don't know, 11 or 12 pass-offs come through my email by the end of the day, I hope. And then get working on lab nine. Okay. Anything else for today? Okay, let's call it a day. Let's get out of here. It's roasting hot.