We need to talk about our DLX data and control hazards. Okay, pipeline hazards. Everybody, or at least by the end of the day today, everybody's going to have a fully functional, well, you're going to have a five-stage pipeline, right? All your pipeline stages are going to be built. The question is, is your processor fully functional? No, because it's not reasonable to expect the person writing the DLX program to stuff a whole bunch of no-ops in there. Okay? Basically, the point of your new lab, what are we on, lab 7? Lab 7 is to get rid of all the no-ops. That's it. Make your processor work correctly without no-ops. Okay, we need to talk about the idea of data hazards and also control hazards. Okay. So we need to talk about this idea of data hazards and control hazards, which are two different kinds of pipeline hazards. All right? I think we can all agree with this, that expecting the programmer to insert no ops is not a reasonable solution. Yes. Okay. Technically, couldn't the assembler put in no ops? Okay. Yeah. I think we'll find a situation, at least one or two, Amaya, where even that won't work. Yeah? I was going to say, if someone puts in no-ops, you're also limiting your size and how many instructions you can do. That's true. You have to store all those no-ops. You have to store all the no-ops. That becomes part of your program. So it expands how big your program is. And it also makes your processor run less efficiently by putting in no-ops. So, Hennessey and Patterson are the two authors that came up with the DLX pipeline, the DLX architecture. Here's a quote from their textbook. What is a data hazard? Data hazards arise when an instruction depends on the results of a previous instruction in a way that is exposed by the overlapping of instructions in the pipeline. This is what you all spent hiding with no-ops on the last lab. The real way to do it is that when we see a data hazard, what we need to do is what we call stalling the pipeline, meaning put everything on pause until the previous instruction has produced the results that the current instruction needs to consume. That's the idea of a stall. So when we talk about data hazards, there's different flavors, different kinds of data hazards. Those of you that are taken maybe like the computer architecture course, did you talk about things like data hazards maybe? So let's talk about a raw, a read-after-write hazard. This is the most common type of data hazard. Here's a very simple example in DLX. Add immediate. I'm going to add R4 and R1 and store the answer in R10. Then the next instruction is going to do R10 plus R10 and store the answer in R11. We can all see, everybody see the data hazard? R10 needs to get updated before we use it in the next instruction. For the lab that's due today, how many no-ops did you have to put between the add-i and the add to get this to behave properly? Two? I saw a couple of groups that were just super cautious and put like five no-ops between every instruction, regardless of whether there was a data hazard or not. So that's overkill, but it works, I guess. Okay? The pipeline has to wait for R10 to be written before it can be read. Do you see why this is called a read-after-write hazard? because I've got a right, but then after the right, I have a read. Read comes after a right. That's a hazard. Okay, we already talked about that. Maybe we need two stalls or two no-ops to get it to behave properly. Here's another one, a right after right. What? A later instruction tries to write a register or a memory location before an earlier instruction. So let's say I've got two instructions. We'll call them Instruction A and Instruction B. Let's say Instruction A wants to update register R20, and then later Instruction B also wants to update the contents of R20. A write-after-write says, is it possible that the later instruction could try to write, to do what's right before the earlier instruction? If the writes get out of order, that's a problem, isn't it? Do we need to account for write-after-write hazards in our DLX pipeline? Is there any way, so when we're talking about writing, we're either talking about writing to registers or writing to the RAM, the data memory. Is there any way that my rights to registers could get out of order? Or my rights to data memory could get out of order? There's no way. It's not possible. So luckily, we don't have to worry about this. We don't have to worry about write-after-write data hazards. Everybody convinced? Anybody want to argue about that? Is that true specifically because we have a five-stage pipeline, or is that always true? So is it true because we have a, I mean, is it because of our five-stage pipeline? it's because of our pipeline in general and because the rights always happen at the same spot in the in the pipeline right there's no way for one instruction to somehow leapfrog ahead of the other one inside of the pipeline so because that doesn't happen then we we don't have to worry about it are there architect do Do architectures exist out there where a write-after-write would be a hazard? Here's some yeses. Anybody know specific examples? Those are like parallel pipelines and certain registers. Yep, parallel pipelines might be a problem. I'm guessing anyone with shared-use floating and fixed-point registers because they often have a parallel floating-point execution path. We talked a lot about out-of-order execution. Many of some Intel processors and most of them today have reordered both of them. So yes, like modern Intel and AMD processors do out-of-order instruction execution. That's absolutely going to potentially expose you to write-after-write hazards. And if you think about it, that's a very, very complicated thing for hardware to do is to figure out how to look at the instructions and then reorder how they're going to be executed. Okay, luckily we're not going to do that for our DLX pipeline. All right. How about, ooh, let's go to war. A write-after read. A later instruction tries to write a destination before an earlier instruction is done reading it. is this one a problem in our DLX pipeline? Right after read. A later instruction tries to write a destination before an earlier instruction is done reading it. So let's think about registers, for example. Our register banks. What stage do we read registers in? The decode stage. What stage do we write registers in? The write-back stage. A later instruction tries to write a destination before an earlier instruction is done reading it. Okay. I mean, is that going to be a problem? No. No, especially for registers, because in our pipeline for registers, writes are already delayed from reads. What about for data memory, though? For data memory, don't reads and writes happen in the memory stage together? Is that one going to be a problem? Can't do both at once, and only one instruction is going to be in the memory stage at a time, so this doesn't seem like it's going to be a problem, does it? So, I think what we really need to worry about is read-after-write hazards, okay? Are those the only three kind of hazards? So, I mean, what else would there be? Write-after-read, write-after-write, write-after-read. I guess the only other would be write-after-write. No, read-after-read. That's not a problem, is it? If we're just reading, does it matter what order we read in? No. So, yep, those are the only three that, as far as data hazards go, that really need to worry about. Okay, this one's a little bit of an eye chart. This is another figure out of the ancient textbook, the DLX textbook. Okay, here's an idea on how we can minimize data hazard pipeline stalls. So let's pause and think about that for a moment. wouldn't it be nice, we figured out that we needed like two no-ops to mitigate like a right after read, no, a read after write hazard. Wouldn't it be nice if we could remove one or both of those stalls and make it go faster? Well, the idea here is this idea called forwarding. In other words, fast tracking results to minimize the read-after-write pipeline stalls. So this textbook gives us a few examples. If you need to, scoot closer to the screen so that you can read these all. So this is a program running. There's an add, and then a sub, and then an and, and then an or, and then an xor. Notice it's an add, R1, R2, R3. and then a sub, R4, R1, R5. Does the add and the sub have a, does the sub depend on the add? Yes, because the add's producing R1 and the sub wants to consume R1. So, without forwarding, we've already figured out that we need two stalls, two cycles of stall for the R1 to get updated in time to be used by the subtract instruction. This diagram here is showing time in clock cycles, so clock cycle 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And as we go down, this is showing us what's going on with the different instructions. So in clock cycle 1, the add instruction is in the fetch, instruction memory, fetch. In clock cycle 2, can you see how the reg block, the outline is half dotted and half solid? Notice the right hand side is solid. that's their intent here is to indicate that this is a register read operation or as a register write that the front end of it would be solid and the back end would be dotted okay so we're going to get the add instruction we're going to read the registers specifically r2 and r3 right we're going to perform the addition operation then does this instruction do anything in the memory stage? No, but in the write-back stage, see how now we're showing the registers with the left-hand side highlighted? We're writing back into the registers. Now, look at something interesting. We need R1 to finish, so that we can write, We need the new value of R1 to do the subtraction. Is it true that the new value of R1 is what comes out of the ALU right here? So if we were sneaky, couldn't we forward, like fast-track this value straight to where it needs to go rather than waiting for it to get written into a register and then read back out of the register? So see this line going from here down to here? This is a fast-tracking, this is a forwarding path, Vanessa. Would you do that by making a copy of it? Something like a copy, yeah. So what we're saying is, this is the register, right? This is the register between the execute and the memory stage. Couldn't I have a path in my architecture that forwarded that answer that came out of the ALU straight to the input B, right, the lower input of the ALU, right? I mean, that could just all be within X-A-Q. Potentially, it could all be within X-A-Q, yep. Let's keep looking. Let's look at the subtract compared to the and. We're going to do a subtract R4, R1, R5, and R6, R1, R7. does the and depend on the subtract no but the and does depend on the add right because remember the add produces R1 the and wants to consume R1 going back to the subtract what do we notice if we allow this fast forwarding right this forwarding path right here to exist do I have to stall or insert no-ups? No. See how I just saved two clock cycles in my execution? Okay, and this AND also wants the results of R1. Okay, but where is the updated version of R1 living now, right? The AND instruction gets to its, it's when it gets to the ALU stage that it needs the new value of R1. So see this, see this dotted line right here, going from that register down to the input of the ALU. So my question for you is, we said R1's value was here for the subtract, why is it here for the for the and because it's the next instruction farther along so everything shifted one step farther in the pipeline so what we're saying is that this and we need a path here from the output of the output register of the memory stage fast forwarded to the input of the ALU. Okay. Yep. So is this why we've been passing through NextPC the whole time? Do we have to check the next instruction to see if it has registers that we're... Maybe. Something like that. I like how you're thinking there. Okay. Now what? But, or, what's this or doing? R8, R1, R9. Do we have any dependencies here? There's the R1 again. Yeah. I mean, yeah. I mean, it's only fine because we're, because of the way that we set up the registers. We could have also set it up in a way that this would, that we would need a third. Right. Isn't it true that on the same clock cycle, the new value of R1 is getting stored in the register, and we're also reading it out of the register. So this absolutely, whether or not this is a hazard, depends on how we implemented our register block. Did we implement it read before write or write before read? I hope you implemented it right before read. If you didn't, you should go fix that. Agree? So if we implemented it right before read, this is not a hazard, is it? We don't have, this dotted line represents nothing. Our architecture will already handle that. Okay? Other things to observe. What if, let's go back to this subtract example. What if instead of saying subtract R4, R1, R5, it said subtract R4, R5, R1? What if the R1 and the R5 were flipped? This dotted line, or something, I mean, the way this is drawn, And doesn't this look like it should be R5, R1? Yeah. But do you agree that a similar path to this probably should exist feeding the upper input to the ALU? It would be a decent amount of work, but you could do it just on the first source, like the top one, and have your assembler enforce the order in there, because you'll only ever be trying to read one register at a time that you're waiting on right for. And it always has to be that top one because your immediate goal always is on the other side. Okay. What if I add a value to itself that I just computed? Ah, shoot. Right. Yep. So that, yep, good point. Yep, that specific case. Okay. Does this example make sense to everybody? Can you see how these dotted lines are basically going to become paths in our hardware architecture that's going to let us get stuff done faster. Would it be like creating muxes and what to put into it? Yep, you're on the right track. We're going to get to a picture that shows that exactly. Hence the upper muxes. Yeah, hence the muxes, yeah. Going back to my other thing, I think there's always an instruction if you replace it with, like for an add, it's a shift left by 1. So you can do the immediate. I'm just continuing this argument for no reason. Here's another example, we're going to do an add, oh, then a load word and then a store word. Oh no. We still got add R1, R2, R3. The good news about the first instruction is that it's never going to have to stall. It can always go straight through. Then we follow it with a load word, zero off of, what does that say? D, R1, into R4. Okay. This one produced, the add produces R1. The load word needs to consume R1. And then the store word also wants to consume R1, right? So remember the previous example, these were all register instructions, right? We didn't have loads and stores. This one we're combining a register result with load and store instructions. So for this one, is this path right here, is that the way to fast forward this? The ALU is going to produce an answer for R1, and we're going to send that answer right back into the ALU. Why? Because we need to do R1 plus, right, whatever's in D, to get the address where we're going to load from. Okay, and then what's this dotted line right here? Same thing, right? The store word, we still need the value of R1 to go back into the ALU so we can do the base plus offset for the store word. But notice again, it comes from two different places. And we've got a third fast forward path here. What's this one trying to represent? The R4. Look at what this is doing. we're going to load a value into R4 and then we're going to turn around and store that value in R4 right back into a different memory location so basically we're doing a memory copy we're reading a value out of somewhere in memory and then storing it at a different spot in the memory is that a valid thing to do in assembly code? yeah, we can't prevent somebody from creating this kind of a code So we need this. I mean, what is this showing? The output from our data memory gets fed right back in again as the input to our data memory? Hmm. Okay. Does it feel like these examples, does it feel like we're... What does this space look like with all of these different exceptions where things need to be forwarded? Does it feel like we're capturing all the instances or are we just barely scratching the surface and there's this huge mess of all different possibilities that might need to be handled that we haven't even thought about? We got one. We got most of them. We got most of them? Okay. Let's work through another example. Oh, my gosh. Okay. This is example three. Before we go through all of them, Is it possible to exhaustively check all of these examples, or are we just going to have some data hazards that are going to be amazing? So, it is possible to create an architecture that responds appropriately to all data hazards. Okay. Okay? We'll get there. Look at this one. You've got a load word, a subtract, an and, and then an or. Now let's look at it. Where are our data hazards? R1 to R1 to R1 to R1. Are there any other hazards, data hazards here? R4, R6. I don't see any. Okay, so the load word, it's first, so it just gets to do its thing, no cares in the world. What's this right here indicating? We're going to load a value, right? That value is going to get stored in R1, right? As soon as we see what the loaded value is, the earliest we can see it is right here coming out of the data memory, right? Can we employ a, notice we want to consume that R1 as part of our subtract. So could we, right, see this path right here? The output of our data memory gets fed back as an input to our ALU. Why? Right, did everybody read the caption here? The load instruction can bypass its result to the and and or, but not to the sub, since that would mean forwarding the results in negative time. Because this line is slanted, right? Because it's slanted, see how the dotted line is going backwards in time? If anybody can create a processor that can do things backwards in time, let me know. That's an automatic A, right? Yeah, that is an automatic A for sure. Okay? So, this one is not possible, is it? So how do I solve this one? This one we do actually have to stall. We actually have to stall for a clock cycle on this one. Okay? Yes? In this case, you can just switch the instructions, the sub and the end. You could, if you want to reorder. Do you want to do that? Nope. You still need the R1 in the same spot. So, is this dotted line right here okay? Yes. Because that's the output, right? The new value of R1 is getting fast-forwarded to the ALU, but that line is sloped the right way. That's going forwards in time, not backwards in time. Okay, and then this one right here, this is a purely vertical line from regs to regs, and we decided this one's just a non-issue, as long as we did our register file right before read. Okay? So the takeaway is that this one is the problem. So here's the picture. See how this is different? Right? This is still example three. Here's the old version of example three. Here's the new. Notice these bubbles that they put in. Okay? The second instruction, the subtract, I'll get my instruction out of the instruction memory. I'll look up R1 and R5, or at least I'll pretend to, but I can't get the new version of R1, can I? So what am I going to do? Stall, because on the next clock cycle, the new version of R1 is available, and now this dotted line is sloped in the right direction. I'm not trying to go backwards in time anymore. Okay? What's this bubble for? Because I stalled this one, doesn't that imply that everything else that's also waiting in the pipeline has to stall also? Otherwise, I'd get instructions overwritten in the pipeline, which wouldn't be good. So as soon as I introduce a bubble, that's going to stall everybody waiting behind me in the assembly line also. Okay, we've still got that register instruction there. What else is different, right? In the previous version, we had that forwarding path between the load word and the and. Where did it go? It's this register to register, which is really nothing, right? And before, we had this one right here, the load word. Wait, sorry, this one right here. The load word and the or that was going to happen in the same clock cycle. Well, that's okay. Now that's not even there at all. Why? Because now we're going to store R1 on the clock cycle before the or tries to read R1. Okay? We'll talk through this chart next week, next Wednesday, because Monday is the midterm. What I'm trying to capture here is all of the, I was nice and generated this table for you, of all the different scenarios, right back to Vanessa's question. These are perhaps all the different scenarios you need to consider for fast forwarding. If you looked at the requirements for lab 7, this is what you're doing is you're solving the data hazards and the control hazards. This is probably the hardest lab of the semester, which is why I'm giving you until March 3rd to work on it. When is March 3rd? So you've got a week and, well, it will really be March 4th, so almost two weeks to work on it. You absolutely should come up with a good plan for how you're going to attack this lab before you start coding. It'll save you hours of pain. And, obviously, you should break a copy of Lab 6 when you're implementing Lab 7. Don't break your original only version of Lab 6. That is what Git is for, yes. Okay? So start thinking about this. Get started on it. We'll talk more about it next week. Remember the midterm on Monday, and everybody have a good weekend.